While there are many different
tools available to use,
it's important as a security
analyst that you learn
how to read and analyze
packets manually.
To do so, let's examine
an important packet
component: IP headers.
Previously, you learned about
the four layers of
the TCP/IP model.
Remember, the TCP/IP model is
a framework that is used to
visualize how data is
organized and transmitted
across a network.
The internet layer accepts and
delivers packets
for the network.
It's also the layer where the
Internet Protocol operates
as the foundation for all
communications on the internet.
It's responsible for making
sure packets reach
their destinations.
The Internet Protocol
operates like
a mail courier
delivering an envelope.
Instead of using the
delivery information
found on the envelope,
the Internet Protocol
uses the information
found in a packet header,
like IP addresses.
It then determines the
best available route
for packets to take,
so that data can be sent
and received between hosts.
As you may already know,
IP packets contain headers.
Headers contain the data
fields essential to
the transfer of data to
its intended destination.
Different protocols
use different headers.
There are two
different versions of
the Internet Protocol: IPv4,
which is considered to be
the foundation of
internet communications,
and IPv6, which is
the most recent version
of the Internet Protocol.
Remember, different protocols
use different headers.
So IPv4 and IPv6 headers differ,
but they contain similar
fields with different names.
IPv4 is still the
most widely used,
so we'll focus on examining
the fields of an IPv4 header.
Let's start with the
Version field, which
specifies which version
of IP is being used,
either IPv4 or IPv6.
Referring back to
our mail analogy,
the Version field is like the
different classes of mail,
like priority,
express, or regular.
Next, IHL stands for
Internet Header Length.
This field specifies
the length of
the IP header plus any options.
The next field, ToS stands
for Type of Service.
This field tells us if
certain packets should be
treated with different care.
For example, think of ToS like
a fragile sticker on
a mailed package.
Next is the Total Length field,
which identifies the length
of the entire packet,
including the headers
and the data.
This can be compared
to the dimensions
and weight of an envelope.
The next three fields,
Identification, Flags,
and Fragment Offset,
deal with information
related to fragmentation.
Fragmentation is
when an IP packet
gets broken up into chunks,
which then get transmitted
over the wire and
reassembled when they arrive
at their destination.
These three fields specify
if fragmentation has been
used and how to reassemble
the broken packets in
the correct order.
This is similar to
how mail can travel
through multiple
routes like mailboxes,
processing facilities,
airplanes, and
mail trucks before it
reaches its destination.
The TTL field stands
for Time to Live.
Like its name suggests,
this field determines how long
a packet can live
before it gets dropped.
Without this field,
packets could
loop through routers endlessly.
TTL is similar to how
tracking information
provides details about
an envelope's expected
delivery date.
The Protocol field specifies
the protocol used by
providing a value which
corresponds to a protocol.
For example, TCP is
represented by 6.
This is similar to
including the number
of a house in a postal address.
The Header Checksum stores
a value called a checksum,
which is used to determine if
any errors have
occurred in the header.
The Source Address specifies
the source IP address and
the Destination
Address specifies
the destination IP address.
This is just like the sender and
receiver's contact information
found on an envelope.
The Options field is not
required and is commonly
used for network troubleshooting
rather than common traffic.
If it's used, the header
length increases.
It's like purchasing postal
insurance for an envelope.
Finally, at the end
of the packet header
is where the packet's
data resides,
like the text in
an email message.
Who knew that the
packets of data we send
across networks contain
so much information?
Coming up soon, you'll
have the opportunity to
examine these packet
fields in detail.